---
layout: post
title: Google Cybersecurity Certificate Course 7 - Automate Cybersecurity Tasks with Python
---
This is the seventh course of the Google Cybersecurity Certificate Course on Coursera. Again it's a mix of my notes and definitions from the course.

[Here is a link to my main page for the course.](https://1dgk.github.io/2024/01/24/gcc-course-index.html)

**Course 7 Overview**
- Basic programming concepts in Python
- Writing effective Python code
- Working with strings and lists
- Putting Python into practice

## Module 1: Introduction to Python
- Best for automating short, simple tasks, e.g., sort through event logs
- Resembles human language
- Less code
- Easy to read
- Standard guidelines
- Online support
- Built-in code

**Examples of how Python is used in cybersecurity**
- Log analysis
- Malware analysis
- Access control list management
- Intrusion detection
- Compliance checks
- Network scanning

**Create a basic Python script**
- Good to start with a # comment

```py
print("Hello World")
```

**Data types in Python**
- String data - letters, symbols, spaces. Can't be used for calculations. 
- Float data - numbers with a decimal point.
- Integer data - numbers without decimal points.
- Boolean
- Lists

```py
# Calculate numbers with print
print(1+1)
```

**Work with variables in Python**
- A container that stores data
- Creating one is often called assignment
- Using them is called 'calling' them
- Often used to simplify or clean code, or to use long strings without having to type them all out
- Important to keep track of data types 

**Conditional statements in Python**
- Automation is done with conditional statements
- Starts with `if`


```py
# Create a conditional

operating_system = "OS 3"
if operating_system == "OS 2":
    print("Updates needed")
else:
    print("No updates needed")
```

**For loops**
- An iterative statement

```py
for i in [1,2,3,4]:
    print(i)
```

`range(0,10)`

**While loops**
```py
# Create a while loop

max_devices = 5
i = 1

while i < max_devices:
    print("User can still connect to additional devices")
    i = i + 1
print("User has reached maximum number of connected devices")
```

Analysts need to be familiar with iterative statements like `for`, `while`, etc.


## Module 2: Write effective Python code
- Functions
- Modules and libraries
- Core readability

**Functions**
- Like a dishwasher. Helps with automation.

**Create a basic function**
```py
# Define a function
def greet_employee():
    print("Welcome! You're logged in!")

# Call a function
greet_employee()
```

**Use parameters in functions**
```py
# Greet employees by name
def greet_employee(name):
    print("Welcome! You're logged in", name)

greet_employee("Charley Patel")
```

**Return statements**
```py
# Return information from a function
def calculate_fails(total_attempts, failed_attempts):
    fail_percentage = failed_attempts / total_attempts
    return fail_percentage

calculate_fails(4,2)
```

A parameter is an object that is included in a function definition for use in that function, an argument is the data brought into a function when it is called, and the return keyword is used to return information from a function. Additionally, global variables are variables accessible throughout the program, and local variables are parameters and variables assigned within a function that aren't usable outside of a function.

**Explore built-in functions**
- print()
- type()
- print(type("Hello"))
    - Inner function is processed first
- max()
- sorted()

```py
# Explore input and output of print
print("This is a string, but", 75, "is a number")
```

```py
# Explore input and output of type
print(type("security"))
print(type(73.2))
```

```py
# Explore max
a = 3
b = 6
c = 9
print(max(a,b,c,))
```

```py
# Explore sorted
username = ["elarson", "bmoreno"]
print(sorted(usernames))
```

Can import a library, that's usually made up of modules.

Python Standard Library. An extensive library.
- `re` module, good for searching for patterns
- `csv` module
- `glob`
- `os`
- `time`

To import a library, just use the `import` keyword.

Useful external libraries for cybersecurity: `numpy` and `bs4`.

**Code readability**
- Style guides
- PEP 8 style guide
    - Python Enhancement Proposals
    - Help with consistency

## Module 3: Work with strings and lists
- Working with strings and lists
- Writing algorithms
- Using regular expressions

**String operations**
- In between quotation marks
- `str()`

```py
# Convert an integer into a string
new_string = str(123)
print(type(new_string))
```

`len` returns the number of elements in an object

```py
# Print the length of a string "Hello"
print(len("Hello!"))
```

`.upper()` and `lower`

```py
# Apply upper method to "Hello"
print("Hello".upper())
```

**String indices and slices**

```py
# Extract a slice from a string
print("HELLO" [1:4])
```

E.g. what does the code `print("HELLO"[2:4]) output? "LL" because slice starts at the character at index 2 and ends one character before index 4.

`.index()`

```py
# Use the index string method
print("HELLO".index("E"))
```

**Note** strings are immutable.

**List operations in Python**

```py
# Use the insert method
my_list = ["a", "b", "c", "d", "e"]
my_list.insert(1,7)
print(my_list)
```

```py
# Use the remove method
my_list = ["a", "b", "c", "d", "e"]
my_list.remove("d")
print(my_list)
```

***Write a simple algorithm**
1. Use string slicing to extract the first three digits from one IP address
2. Use a loop to apply that solution to every IP address on the list

```py
address = "198.233.xx.xx"

# Extract the first three characters of an IP address
print(address[0:3])
```

```py
IP = ["198.223.xx.xx", "198.101.xx.xx", "180.064.xx.xx", "192.168.xx.xx", "184.090.xx.xx"]

# Extract the first three characters from a list of IP addresses
networks = []
for address in IP:
    networks.append(address[0:3])
print(networks)
```

**Regular expressions in Python**
`import re`

- Search for any kind of pattern

**Q** Which string matches with the regular expression "b\wa+b"?

**A** The string "bkaab" matches with the regular expression "b\wa+b". The first character must be "b". After this, the symbol \w is used to match any alphanumeric character, including "k". Next, the + symbol specifies that there should be one or more occurrences of the character it follows, which in this case is "a". Finally, the string must end with "b".

Search for an email with a regex:
`\w+@\w+\.\w+`


## Module 4: Python in practice

### Resources
- [JupyterLab](https://jupyter.org/) - Python notebook interface
- [Python Built-in Functions](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html)
- [PEP 8 Style Guide](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/)